---
layout: post
name: Wrist-attached Keyboard
title: Why Wrist-attached Keyboards are the Future
image: ../pictures/rfc/index.jpeg
permalink: rfc1
---
<span style="font-size: 10px">Since 2014</span>

### What if we could type essays while we were walking without looking at our phones? What if we could see a text pop up on our Google Glass (or some comparable wearable) while walking and immediately start typing a response? Wouldn't it be faster if we could type with a keyboard instead of our thumbs?

I've been stuck on this idea ever since the iPhone came out. 

I’ve had this idea since my freshman year of high school. Basically, they sit like a watch band on your wrists connected to your phone/computer through Bluetooth. When you want to type, you flick your wrists and it forms a relatively rigid framework underneath your fingers that you can use to type. 

I was thinking a lot about this idea when the Google Glasses were rumored to come out and people were saying they would be awesome, and ideally they would function in conjunction with some form of AR/wearable because you could see your screen. A base case use for the ‘wrist keyboard’ would be for if you were texting a friend or writing an email on the train while using your phone. A lot of people are slower typers with their two thumbs, and allowing them to type with their full hand could be beneficial. 

This is something I really wish I had when walking around. Imagine if I could take notes or jot my thoughts down while walking to a meeting by using a keyboard attached to my wrist. I wouldn’t need to look at my phone, wouldn’t need to change how I walk, it would just be typing directly into notes or some other word processor. 