---
layout: post
name: Pre-Mortem 1
date: June 10, 2019
image: ../pictures/posts/bp4cover.jpg
title: The Death of a Blog
permalink: bp4
---
<span style="font-size: 150%">In a16z's podcast <a href="https://open.spotify.com/episode/6yWfLitwZTiLzvuZu0g0fj?si=mXymmNSKS9-s_R69nfjZHA" target="_blank"><i>Innovating in Bets</i></a>, Annie Duke tells listeners how to play the odds. </span>

This piece was inspired by a16z's podcast *Innovating in Bets* with poker player Annie Duke. In the podcast she describes how in poker it is incredibly important to be a process-oriented thinker, rather than an outcome-based one. This helps players remain objective when analyzing their play and avoid being clouded by emotional feedback. 

Throughout the podcast, Annie offers various methods for listeners to apply this process-oriented thinking in their own lives. I particularly liked the method which she called 'time travel'. In order to time travel you need to do two things:

1. Project your project/dream/goal/blog five years into the future and imagine you've achieved everything you wanted. What did you do that made the most difference? Who did you meet that helped you most on your goal? Where did you get lucky?

2. Imagine five years into the future when your project catastrophically failed. What happened? Was something you deemed to be mission-critical really just a distraction? This exercise will create a pre-mortem - examining the death of your goal before it happens.

To be honest, I could keep this brainstorming to myself. But I believe putting down thoughts into words distills the essence of the thought - if one cannot explain it in words then the thought is probably not fleshed out. Also, I believe in the power of public accountability. By putting these words online for the world to see it serves as a standard through which to judge me.

This post will serve as the pre-mortem for my blog. Why start with the negative? Annie talked about how people gladly engage in the first part, but often skip the second because it's unpleasant to think about. I prefer to start with the difficult parts.

I've done my best to separate outcome failure from process failure, but I think it's important to write about both. Ultimately we can see the outcome, but only I can influence the process. Process drives outcomes, so I start with the outcome and work backwards to explain the *why*.

<center><h1>Made in Failure's Image</h1></center>

In order to fail, you must first have a goal to fail at. I have three main goals for my blog: drive dialogue on issues I am interested in, meet and learn from influencers and thought leaders in those respective categories, and become a better writer.

Failure to achieve these goals would look like the following:
1. I was unable to drive any meaningful dialogue through my newsletters and blog posts. Either the quality of both were too low, or I wrote about topics interesting only to me. 

2. The thought leaders in categories that interested me either never saw my work, or deemed it too irrelevant/low quality to engage with me. This could potentailly be worse than never starting the blog at all - they now actively look down on my ideas and thoughts.

3. I stop writing, or the quality of my writing decreases over time. Since practice almost unequivocally makes one better, I find the second outcome relatively impossible without the first.

There are a variety of ways that these outcomes come to pass. I could get hit by a bus or struck by lightning, but I believe they are most likely to happen because of habits that build over time. Motivation is great in the moment, but long term trends are driven by habits. Therefore, I write the pre-mortem through the lens of habits.

<center><h1>Habits of Failure</h1></center>

The problem with habits is the best ones don't show their value until later in the future, but the worst ones are generally rewarded immediately. The constant war between instant gratification and long-term benefit will be the most important inflection point for my blog. These are the habits that I find most likely to lead to the failures above.

#### **Habit One** - *not showing up to the game*

You miss every shot you don't take, practice makes the master - there are many time old adages saying the same thing. You have to show up in order to play. Writing at it's best looks natural and effortless, but it isn't always easy and can be very frustrating. 

Failing to write because of frustration will be the kiss of death for my blog. David Perell, one of my favorite writers online, wrote that the only way to get better at writing is simply by writing more. By avoiding writing, I have killed my blog in two ways with one habit. I will not have much content to share, thus the total addressable market (TAM) for my blog will be narrow. Furthermore, what little I *do* write will be of lower quality. 

This affects all three parts of the failure outcomes. There cannot be dialogue without something to talk about, thought leaders favor interacting with higher quality material, and failure to practice will result in failure to improve.

#### **Habit Two** - *perfection paralysis*

It's scary to publish something on the internet. Anyone can view your work, and it's essentially permanent. This habit is slightly different from the first because I'm not failing to write, but I'm failing to publish.

This failure to publish means I'm continuously iterating on a single product rather than many. There is a great story from the book *Art & Fear* by David Bayles & Ted Orland. It goes like this:

> A ceramics teacher divided his students into two groups, one that would be graded on the quantity of their work and the other on the quality. At the end of the week the students graded on the quantity only needed to make 50 pounds worth of pots to get an A, and students graded on quality needed one perfect pot.
>
> At the end of the week, an interesting phenomenon occured. All the highest quality pots were produced by the group being graded for quantity. While the 'quantity' group was constantly iterating and improving, the 'quality' group was just thinking about perfection and ended up with a pile of dead clay.

If fear of perfection keeps me from writing in volume, the quality of my blog will be severely impacted. Since the main goal of the blog is to connect with top quality thinkers and industry professionals, it's impossible to get their attention/respect without top quality work. 

#### **Habit Three** - *confusing what I want for what readers want*

I created this blog instead of using Wordpress or Squarespace because I wanted to do it my way. If the navigation bar sucks, that's on me and I'll work to fix it. But if there's something particularly great about my work, I want that to be because of me too.

The problem with creating content that way is what works for me might not work for readers. 

#### **Habit Five** - *failing to differentiate*

There are lots of people blogging right now. Some of them use Squarespace so their websites look beautiful, and some (like Benedict Evans) are successful Venture Capitalists with inside information that dwarfs my own. 

