---
layout: post
name: Esports4
title: The Future of Esports is ?
permalink: esports-4
---

<span style="font-size: 10px">May 18th, 2019</span>

This is part four of my position paper on esports series. To read the first three parts click [here](/esports-1), [here](/esports-2), and [here](esports-1).

In order for esports to take its 

Potential problems:

1. The fanbases are driven by a few players that are 'aging'. The top four largest regions have a few stars that shine above the rest. In Korea, it's Faker. In Europe, it's Rekkless. In North America it's Doublelift and Bjergsen, and in China it's Uzi and Rookie. I've already mentioned how esports careers are short (link article), but the problem with gaming is a certain esport isn't guaranteed to last forever. Starcraft was the most popular esport by miles in the 90s and 2000s. Now, it's virtually dead from a marketing standpoint. If stars in the most popular regions retire for good, this may impact overall viewership. We know that these stars and brands drive viewership from the numbers (insert numbers here).

We also know that competing esports can be launched in a matter of days. Look at Apex Legends, Fortnite, and Overwatch. While League is the most popular esport right now, it took years before it became a worldwide phenomenom. These other games became popular in days, even hours. The rate of acceptance for new games is accelerating.

And while that may be good for the whole league, that's not a good thing for specific games. The stickiness of football and basketball is an extremely important part of marketing, because they are sure that people will tune in every game. If the number of popular games saturates the market, there could be what we call in economics choice overload which decreases overall viewership. 

So if the older players in a given esport move on into different parts of their career, they may kill the game overall. And that's a lot of power to have. 

But that might not be the case, as there are always new players that can pick up the mantle. G2 Esports is the most prominent example for League of Legends. Once the pariah of the European league for taking 'vacations' at international tournaments, they have earned the love and adulation of fans for top performances recently. One could argue, however, that they are still not as popular as Fnatic in Europe, and never will be.  